---
title: Laws of exponents.
layout: default
---
> For $ b > 1 $,
>
> 1. If $m, n, p, q$ are integers with $n > 0, q > 0$ and $r = m/n = p/q$, prove $(b^m)^{1/n} = (b^p)^{1/q}$. _Thus, we define $b^r = (b^m)^{1/n}$._
> 2. Prove $b^{r+s} = b^{r} b^{s}$ for rational $r, s$.
> 3. For $x$ real, define $B(x) = \\{ b^t | t \in \mathbb{Q}, t \leq x \\}$. Prove that for rational $r$, we have $b^r = \sup B(r)$. _Thus, we define $b^x = \sup B(x)$._
> 4. Prove that for real $x,y$, $b^{x+y} = b^x b^y$. 

1. Recall theorem 1.21 in the text: for real $x > 0$ and any integer $n > 0$, there exists a unique real $y$ such that $y^n = x$, and we define $y := x^{1/n}$. To prove this part, we just apply this theorem repeatedly. Put $x = (b^m)^{1/n}$. Then $x^n = b^m$ by theorem 1.21. Raising both sides to the $q$th power[^1], we have $x^{nq} = b^{mq}$[^2]. Now since $\frac{m}{n} = \frac{p}{q}$, we have $qm = np$, so the equation becomes $x^{qn} = x^{pn} = y$. By theorem 1.21, $y$ is unique and $y^{1/n} = x^q = b^p$. Using theorem 1.21 one last time, $x = (b^p)^{1/q}$, completing the proof.
2. Write as integers $r = a/b$ and $s = c/d$ for $b,d > 0$. Then $r + s = \frac{ad + bc}{bd} = \left( b ^ {ad + bc} \right)^{1/bd}$. On the other hand,
$$\begin{aligned}
b^r b^s &= b^{\frac{a}{b}} b^{\frac{c}{d}} \\\\
        &= \left( \left( b^{\frac{a}{b}} b^{\frac{c}{d}} \right)^{bd} \right)^{1/bd} \\\\
        &= \left( b^{ad} b^{bc} \right)^{1/bd} \\\\
        &= \left( b^{ad + bc} \right)^{1/bd} \\\\
\end{aligned}$$
so the two expressions are equal.
3. We first [prove $b^t$ is monotone in $t$ for rational $t$](#monotone). (The proof is at bottom of the page, and rather pedantic. Let me know if you have a simpler proof.) Then $b^r$ is a lower bound for $B(r)$. Moreover, since $r$ is rational, $b^r \in B(r)$. Then any $c > b^r$ could not be an upper bound, for $b^r$ would be strictly less than $c$. So $b^r = \sup B(r)$. 
4. In this problem, let $t, u, v \in \mathbb{Q}$. Given $b^{x+y} = \sup B(x+y) = \sup \\{ b^t | t \leq x + y \\}$, $b^x = \sup B(x) = \sup \\{ b^u | u \leq x \\}$, and $b^y = \sup B(y) = \sup \\{ b^v | v \leq y\\}$, we show $b^x b^y = \sup B(x+y)$. First, $b^x b^y$ = $\sup \\{ b^u b^v | u \leq x, v \leq y \\} = \sup C$. It suffices to show $\sup B(x+y) = \sup C$. Since $C \subseteq B(x+y)$, as $u \leq x, v \leq y \Rightarrow u + v \leq x + y$, we have $\sup C \leq \sup B(x+y)$. It remains to show $\sup B(x+y) \leq \sup C$. First suppose $t = x + y$. Then by [exercise 1](/1.1.html), both $x$ and $y$ are rational, so we can pick $u = x, v = y$, giving $B(x+y) \subseteq C$, so $\sup B(x+y) \leq \sup C$. Now suppose $t < x + y$ and, for contradiction, $\sup C < \sup B(x,y)$. Then since $\mathbb{Q}$ in dense in $\mathbb{R}$ and $b^{x}$ is monotone, we have $r, s \in \mathbb{Q}$ such that $\sup C < b^{r+s} \leq \sup B(x+y)$. Since $ t < x + y $, we have $ r + s < x + y $. Using density of $\mathbb{Q}$ again, we can pick $\alpha \leq x, \beta \leq y$ with $ r + s < \alpha + \beta < x + y $. By monotonicity, $\sup C < b^{r + s} < b^{\alpha + \beta}$. But $b^{\alpha + \beta} \in C$, contradicting $\sup C < b^{\alpha + \beta}$. So $\sup B(x+y) \leq \sup C$, completing the proof.

#### $b^t$ is monotone in $t$:          {#monotone}
1. We begin by proving that if $b \leq a$, then for $n \in \mathbb{N}$, we have $b^n \leq a^n$. We have the case for $n = 1$ by hypothesis. Now suppose $b^n \leq a^n$. Then multiplying both sides by $b$, we have $b(b^n) \leq b(a^n) \leq a(a^n)$. So $b^{n+1} \leq a^{n+1}$, completing the induction.
2. Next we prove if $a < b$, then $a^{1/n} < b^{1/n}$. By theorem 1.21, $a = y^n$ and $b = z^n$. So $y^n < z^n$, and by the contrapositive of the previous statement, we have $y < z$, so $a^{1/n} < b^{1/n}$.
3. Now we prove for $n,m \in \mathbb{Z}$, if $n < m$, then $(b^n)^{1/p} < (b^m)^{1/p}$. Armed with the previous statement, we need only show $b^n < b^m$. Since $n < m$, we have $0 < m - n$. Since $b > 1$, we have $1 < b^{m-n}$. Multiplying both sides by $b^n$ recovers $b^n < b^m$.
4. We are ready to prove the result for **rational** $t$. Let $r, s \in \mathbb{Q}$ with $r < s$. Write as integers $r = a/b$ and $s = c/d$ for $b, d > 0$. Then $r = ad/bd$ and $s = bc/bd$, and since $r < s$, we have $ad < bc$. Combining statements 2 and 3, we have $b^r = (b^{ad})^{1/bd} < (b^{bc})^{1/bd} = b^s$, completing the proof.
5. Finally we prove for **real** $t$. Let $r, s \in \mathbb{R}$ with $r < s$. Because $\mathbb{Q}$ is dense in $\mathbb{R}$, there exists a rational $q$ such that $r < q < s$. Then $b^r = \sup B(r) < b^q < \sup B(s) = b^s$.

[^1]: Not exactly sure how to justify this part... advice?
[^2]: That $(x^{n})^{q} = x^{nq}$ follows from associativity of multiplication.
